# Part 1: Variables & Data Types

## 1.1. Variables
Each thing has a name, like "toy" or "book." In computer programs, variables are like labels for these magical boxes. They help us remember and use the things we put inside. Just like how you can change what's inside your toy box, in programming, we can change what's inside a variable. It's like having a special word for a special box that holds different things whenever we want!

Just like for a toy box, we can put different things inside a variable. In programming, we call these things "data types." Here are some common data types:

| Data Type | Description |
| --- | --- |
| Integer | A whole number (1, 2, 3, 4) |
| Float | A decimal number (1.5, 2.5, 3.5, 4.5) |
| String | Text ("Hello World") |
| Boolean | True or False (True, False) |


## 1.2. Declaring Variables

In Python, we can create a variable by giving it a name and setting it equal to a value. We can also change the value of a variable by reassigning it.

### Assigning Variables

Imagine our drunkard friend, John, who is 30 years old and 1.83 meters tall. We can create variables for each of these things:

```python
# Create a variable called "name" and set it equal to your name
name = "John"

# Create a variable called "age" and set it equal to your age
age = 30

# Create a variable called "height" and set it equal to your height in inches
height = 1.83

# Create a variable called "can_drink" and set it equal to a boolean value
can_drink = True

# Create a variable called "should_drink" and set it equal to a boolean value
should_drink = False
```

### Reassigning Variables

The following morning, John wakes up and realises that he is 31 years old, with a terrible migraine from the prolific drinking the night before. John decides to change his mindset, and forbids himself from drinking. 

Lets adjust the variables to reflect this:

```python
# Reassign the variable "age" to be equal to your age + 1
age = age + 1

# Reassign the variable "can_drink" to be equal to False
can_drink = False
```

### Looking Inside the Box

We can print the value of a variable to the console using the `print()` function. This is useful for debugging, and for checking that our variables are storing the values we expect them to.

```python
# Print the value of the variable "name"
print(name)

# Print the value of the variable "age"
print(age)

# Print the value of the variable "height"
print(height)

# Print the value of the variable "can_drink"
print(can_drink)

# Print the value of the variable "should_drink"
print(should_drink)
```

If all is well, you should see the following output:

```
John
31
1.83
False
False
```

## 1.3. Data Types

As mentioned above, there are several different data types in Python. The basic types we will be using for now are as follows: 

| Data Type | Description |
| --- | --- |
| Integer | A whole number (1, 2, 3, 4) |
| Float | A decimal number (1.5, 2.5, 3.5, 4.5) |
| String | Text ("Hello World") |
| Boolean | True or False (True, False) |

### Integers

Integers are whole numbers. They can be positive or negative, but cannot contain decimal points. 

```python
# Create a variable called "age" and set it equal to your age
age = 30

# Print the value of the variable "age"
print(age)
```

### Floats

Floats are decimal numbers. They can be positive or negative, and can contain decimal points. 

```python
# Create a variable called "height" and set it equal to your height in inches
height = 1.83

# Print the value of the variable "height"
print(height)
```

### Strings

Strings are text. They can contain letters, numbers, and symbols. Strings are always surrounded by quotes, either single or double. 

```python
# Create a variable called "name" and set it equal to your name
name = "John"

# Print the value of the variable "name"
print(name)
```

### Booleans

Booleans are either True or False. They are used to represent the truth value of an expression. 

```python
# Create a variable called "can_drink" and set it equal to a boolean value
can_drink = True

# Print the value of the variable "can_drink"
print(can_drink)
```

## 1.4. Variable Naming Conventions

### Rules

There are always some stylistic considerations to following depending on the language you are using. In Python, there are a few rules to follow when naming variables:

- Variable names must start with a letter or an underscore
- Variable names cannot start with a number
- Variable names can only contain alpha-numeric characters and underscores (A-z, 0-9, and _ )
- Variable names are case-sensitive (age, Age and AGE are three different variables)

```python
# Valid variable names
name = "John"
age = 30
height = 1.83
can_drink = True

# Invalid variable names
1name = "John"
age! = 30
height-inches = 1.83
can drink = True

# Because variable names are case-sensitive, the following are all different variables
age = 30
Age = 30
AGE = 30
```

### Conventions

There are also some conventions to follow when naming variables:

- Variable names should be descriptive
- Variable names should be easily readable
- Variable readability is usually improved by using one of the following strategies:
    - Camel Case: `thisIsCamelCase`
    - Snake Case: `this_is_snake_case`
    - Pascal Case: `ThisIsPascalCase`

```python
this_is_snake_case = "This is a long variable name"
thisIsCamelCase = "This is a long variable name"
ThisIsPascalCase = "This is a long variable name"
```

It is not important which you choose, but it is important to be consistent not only within your own code, but also with the code of others.

## 1.5. Primitive and Reference Data Types

### Primitive Data Types

Primitive data types are the most basic data type, and are built into the language. They are immutable, meaning that they cannot be changed. If we put a primitive data type into a variable (magic toy box), we cannot change the value of the variable. Instead, we must create a new variable and assign it a new value.

The primitive data types in Python are:

| Data Type | Description |
| --- | --- |
| Integer | A whole number (1, 2, 3, 4) |
| Float | A decimal number (1.5, 2.5, 3.5, 4.5) |
| String | Text ("Hello World") |
| Boolean | True or False (True, False) |

This should look familiar, as we have already covered these data types above.

### Reference Data Types

Reference data types are more complex data types, They are 'mutable' meaning that they can be changed. If we put a reference data type into a variable (magic toy box), we can change the value of the variable.

Also, if two variables contain the same reference data type, they will both point to the same object. This means that if we change the value of one variable, the value of the other variable will also change.

This is because reference data types are stored in memory, and the variable is just a pointer to the location in memory where the data is stored.

** Note: This is a simplification of what is actually happening, but it is a useful mental model to have. **

** TODO: add diagram **